# PoCL-Vortex

To add OpenCL support for the Vortex GPU, we extend the PoCL compiler with a Vortex support. Since PoCL targets an efficient and standards-compliant implementation of OpenCL, adding a new device target is relatively straightforward.

## 1. PoCL-Vortex Structure

PoCL has three important directories: `lib/CL`, `lib/kernel`, and `lib/llvmopencl`.

- `lib/CL` contains the common OpenCL implementation and a `device/` subdirectory that provides target-specific runtime libraries for each hardware backend.
- `lib/kernel` contains target-specific built-in kernel libraries.
- `lib/llvmopencl` contains PoCL’s LLVM compilation passes.

```bash
pocl-vortex
├── include
├── lib
│   ├── CL
│   │   ├── device/vortex
│   │   └── ...
│   ├── kernel/vortex
│   ├── llvmopencl
│   └── ...
└── ...
```
therefore, The most important directories for the Vortex extension are `lib/CL/device/vortex` and `lib/kernel/vortex`.

### `lib/CL/device/vortex`

This directory contains host-side build and compilation logic, including:

- Host runtime function call implementations using the Vortex runtime library (e.g., `pocl-vortex.c`)
- Kernel argument structures (e.g., `kernel_args.h`)
- Wrapper kernels (e.g., `kernel_main.c`)

In particular, host-side operations related to kernel launch, execution, and memory management (allocation, transfer, etc.) are implemented here.

### `lib/kernel/vortex`

This directory contains Vortex-specific built-in libraries, including `atomics`, `barrier`, and `printf`.

### `lib/llvmopencl`

This directory contains passes for Kernel Arguments Translation, Work-item coordinates Translation, Memory Structure Handling, Built-in Library Linking, Thread Scheduling & Spawn Code Insertion. For scheduling function support and extend compilation support, VOLT modifies files under `lib/llvmopencl`.

## 2. Implemented OpenCL Host Functions

The following host functions are implemented to support Vortex. We currently support all OpenCL function lowering except function for native execution.

- `pocl_vortex_build_hash`
- `pocl_vortex_probe`
- `pocl_vortex_uninit`
- `pocl_vortex_init`
- `pocl_vortex_init_context`
- `pocl_vortex_free_context`
- `pocl_vortex_run`
- `pocl_vortex_alloc_mem_obj`
- `pocl_vortex_free`
- `pocl_vortex_init_build`
- `pocl_vortex_post_build_program`
- `pocl_vortex_free_program`
- `pocl_vortex_create_kernel`
- `pocl_vortex_free_kernel`
- `pocl_vortex_submit`
- `pocl_vortex_join`
- `pocl_vortex_flush`
- `pocl_vortex_notify`
- `pocl_broadcast`
- `pocl_vortex_read`
- `pocl_vortex_write`

Each Vortex host runtime function delegates to the [Vortex runtime library](https://github.com/vortexgpgpu/vortex/tree/master/runtime). As shown in the example, `pocl_vortex_read` invokes `vx_copy_from_dev` to copy data from the device to host memory. Since Vortex supports multiple simulators and backends, the runtime library is linked per target. Currently, Vortex supports the `opae`, `rtlsim`, `simx`, and `xrt` backends, and each backend provides the same runtime API (e.g., `vx_copy_from_dev`).

```c
void pocl_vortex_read(void *data,
                      void *__restrict__ host_ptr,
                      pocl_mem_identifier *src_mem_id,
                      cl_mem src_buf,
                      size_t offset,
                      size_t size) {
  int vx_err;
  vortex_buffer_data_t* buf_data = (vortex_buffer_data_t*)src_mem_id->mem_ptr;
  vx_err = vx_copy_from_dev(host_ptr, buf_data->vx_buffer, offset, size);
  if (vx_err != 0) {
    POCL_ABORT("POCL_VORTEX_READ\n");
  }
}
```

## 3. Kernel Launch Mechanism

VOLT generates kernel code that executes in Vortex threads. Since the Vortex GPU is implemented as a RISC-V CPU extended with a warp/wavefront execution model, each Vortex thread requires a well-defined entry point.

However, an input OpenCL program typically provides only host-side entry points and does not provide a device-side “main” for the Vortex GPU. Therefore, VOLT inserts a wrapper function (in `kernel_main.c`) for each global device function. To launch a kernel, the wrapper “main” calls `vx_spawn_threads` with the kernel launch configuration and the kernel function pointer.

```cpp
return vx_spawn_threads(
    kargs->work_dim,
    kargs->num_groups,
    kargs->local_size,
    kernel_func,
    arg);
```

The `vx_spawn_threads` function is implemented in the [Vortex kernel library](https://github.com/vortexgpgpu/vortex/tree/master/kernel). It primarily:

- Computes active hardware configuration information (e.g., active cores / active warps per cores)
- Generates runtime Workgroups to Active Cores Assignment (e.g., assigning block 0 to hardware core 0)
- Warp Iterations Calculation
- Spawns Warps

## 4. Invoking Further Compilation and Execution via PoCL

To trigger additional compilation steps in the OpenCL pipeline (via LLVM), VOLT uses PoCL’s virtual function interface. As a result, users only need to invoke the `pocl` executable and do not need to manually specify all LLVM commands during compilation.

The general LLVM compilation and linking commands are implemented in `compile_vortex_program` in `lib/CL/device/vortex/vortex-utils.cc`. To add default flags for further extensions (e.g., enabling RISC-V atomic features), can add those flags in this function.

## 5. Metadata Insertion for Vortex

To convey metadata information to the middle-end compiler, VOLT uses metadata and dummy functions.

- **Uniformity metadata:** To convey uniform information, VOLT adds the `vortex.uniform` metadata to instructions related to kernel launch configuration (work-group size / work-item size) and local memory accesses. See `lib/CL/device/vortex-utils.cc` for details.
- **Intrinsic-like queries:** To convey intrinsic function calls (e.g., querying the number of hardware threads), VOLT inserts dummy functions with Vortex kernel-style names such as `vx_num_thread()`. These dummy calls are later lowered in the LLVM compiler.
