# CuPBoP_Vortex

Volt extends CUDA support for Vortex based on [CuPBoP](https://github.com/cupbop/CuPBoP), which is designed for CUDA programs targeting x86 backends.

## 1. CuPBoP-Vortex Structure

CuPBoP is organized into two major components: `compilation` and `runtime`.

- `compilation` contains the host- and kernel-side IR translation passes required to retarget CUDA programs to different backends.
- `runtime` contains the runtime libraries used when executing CUDA. This folder contain both host-side CUDA APIs and device-side support libraries in seperate subfolder.


```bash
CuPBoP_vortex
├── compilation
│   ├── HostTranslation
│   └── KernelTranslation
│   
├── runtime
│   ├── src/vortex
│   │   ├── host
│   │   └── kernel
│   └── ...
│   
├── examples
└── ...
```

### `compilation/HostTranslation`

This directory contains host-side IR translation passes, including:

- Replacing CUDA built-in host functions (`ReplaceCudaBuiltin.cpp`)
- Replacing constant memory accesses with global memory accesses (`ReplaceConstantMemory.cpp`)

In this section, we focus on rewriting NVIDIA-specific host functions—such as kernel launch APIs and memory-related APIs (e.g., `cudaLaunchKernel` / `cudaMemcpytoSymbol`)—so that the CuPBoP_Vortex runtime can interpret and execute them correctly. 



### `compilation/KernelTranslation`

This directory contains kernel-side IR translation passes, including:

- Generating a kernel wrapper for global device function (thread scheduling and spawn-code insertion) (`generate_wrapper.cpp`)
- Updating the memory hierarchy (e.g., replacing shared memory with global memory or Vortex local memory) (`memory_hierarchy.cpp`)
- Implementing warp-level primitive support (`warp_func.cpp`)

In this section, we focus on replacing NVIDIA-specific device-side APIs and built-ins (e.g., `threadIdx`-like variables) so they can be interpreted on Vortex, while preserving structure of higher-level CUDA software features such as cooperative groups whenever possible.

### `runtime`

This directory contains:

- **Host-side CUDA APIs** that map CUDA runtime calls to the Vortex runtime library
- **Device-side support libraries**, including math functions and warp-level primitive implementations adapted for Vortex

In other words, the runtime provides the “glue” that connects CUDA-facing APIs to Vortex-specific implementations.


## 2. Supported CUDA Host Functions

The following CUDA host functions are implemented to support Vortex. Most APIs intentionally preserve the CUDA runtime function names to improve long-term maintainability.

- `cudaMalloc`
- `cudaFree`
- `cudaMemset`
- `cudaMemcpy`
- `cudaMemcpyfromSymbol`
- `cudaMemcpyToSymbol`
- `cudaSetDevice`
- `cudaGetDeviceProperties`
- `__cudaPushCallConfiguration`
- `__cudaPopCallConfiguration`
- `cudaFreeHost`
- `cudaGetDeviceCount`
- `cudaGetDevice`
- `cudaDeviceReset`
- `cudaDeviceSynchronize`
- `cudaThreadSynchronize`
\

Similar to the OpenCL path, each Vortex host runtime function delegates its work to the [Vortex runtime library](https://github.com/vortexgpgpu/vortex/tree/master/runtime). As shown in the example below, `cudaMalloc` ultimately calls `vx_mem_alloc` to allocate device memory. Because this layer is shared, users can run the same CUDA program across multiple Vortex backends/simulators (e.g., `opae`, `rtlsim`, `simx`, `xrt`) using the same runtime API calls.

```c
cudaError_t cudaMalloc(void **devPtr, size_t size) {
  auto DC = DeviceContext::instance();
  uint64_t mem_addr;  
  DC->dev_mem_alloc(size, VX_MEM_READ_WRITE, &mem_addr);
  *devPtr = (void*)mem_addr;
   return cudaSuccess;
}

 void dev_mem_alloc(int size, int flag, uint64_t* mem_addr) {
    vx_buffer_h mem_buffer = nullptr;
    // Allocate memory on device
    RT_CHECK(vx_mem_alloc(this->device(), size, flag, &mem_buffer));
		...
  }
```

# Kernel Launch Mechanism

Similar to the OpenCL implementation, CuPBoP-Vortex inserts a wrapper function (in `kernel_wrapper.cpp`) for global device function. The wrapper invokes `vx_spawn_threads` with the kernel launch configuration and a pointer to the corresponding kernel entry function.

## 3. Supported CUDA Device Features

CUDA math functions invoked inside kernels (e.g., `sqrt`) are often lowered into NVIDIA-specific symbols (e.g., `__nv_sqrt`). To support these on Vortex, CuPBoP-Vortex supports a prebuilt Vortex-compatible math library into the kernel/runtime, removing the dependency on NVIDIA’s device math library.

Similarly, warp-level primitives (e.g., `__any_sync`) are mapped to Vortex-supported intrinsics and runtime implementations so that the same CUDA kernel semantics can be preserved on Vortex’s different execution model.

-  

## 4. CuPBoP Built-in Libaray

The CuPBoP runtime bridges the device-side CUDA API to target backends. Note that some device functions are specially handled because NVVM intrinsics cannot be re-defined. In that case, the framework will first rename NVVM intrinsics to match the CuPBoP function signatures, then remove their corresponding function bodies to allow linking with CuPBoP runtime definition.  Below lists the currently supported built-in functions in CuPBoP-Vortex.

- Warp primitives:
  - `__all_sync`, `__any_sync`, `__ballot_sync`, `__uniform_sync`, `__activemask`, `__shfl_sync`, `__shfl_up_sync`, `__shfl_down_sync`, `__shfl_xor_sync`
- Math functions:
  - `__nv_exp`, `__nv_sqrt`, `__nv_sqrtf`, `__nv_rsqrtf`
  - `__nv_logf`, `__nv_log10f`, `__nv_expf`, `__nv_fast_log2f`
  - `__nv_powi`, `__nv_powif`, `__nv_powf`, `__nv_fast_powf`
  - `__nv_fmodf`, `__nv_fabsf`, `__nv_isnanf`, `__nv_isinff`
- Other NVVM helpers:
  - `__nvvm_mul24_i`, `__nv_ffs`, `__nv_popc`
  - `__nvvm_fmin_ftz_f`, `__nvvm_fmin_f`, `__nvvm_fmax_ftz_f`, `__nvvm_fmax_f`
  - `__nvvm_membar_gl`, `__nvvm_atomic_load_inc_32`
  - `__nvvm_div_approx_ftz_f`, `__nvvm_div_approx_f`, `__nvvm_reflect`
